DOCSP-51347: Server Selection (#118)
mongodb/docs-kotlin-sync: source/connect/connection-options/server-selection.txt

.. _kotlin-sync-server-selection:

==========================
Customize Server Selection
==========================

.. contents:: On this page
   :local:
   :backlinks: none
   :depth: 1
   :class: singlecol

.. facet::
   :name: genre
   :values: reference

.. meta::

>    :keywords: read preference, write

Reviewer: S: maybe add a few meta keyword about "server selection", "selection", etc?

Overview
--------

All MongoDB drivers follow a defined algorithm when selecting a server to read or write
from. By using the ``ClusterSettings`` property of a ``MongoClientSettings`` object, you can
customize this algorithm to choose the server that works best for your application.

.. important::

   Customizing the server selection algorithm might have unintended consequences,
   such as degraded read or write performance.

> Default Algorithm

Reviewer 2: What does "default" mean here? There is only one algorithm, the one you specified, it is always the same.

Author: Will reword!

-----------------

When the {+driver-short+} executes a read operation, it performs the following steps,
in order, to select a MongoDB deployment:

> 1. Selects all servers that match the active read preference from the list of known servers.

Reviewer 2: Instead of separating the description of this step for reads and writes in such a way that the step for the writes is described stylistically differently and in a different place, which makes the whole thing more difficult to read, let's describe them together conceptually similarly to how it's done in the API documentation https://mongodb.github.io/mongo-java-driver/5.5/apidocs/driver-core/com/mongodb/connection/ClusterSettings.html#getServerSelector(). Something like:

```
1. Selects all known servers suitable for the requested type of operation, barring those that the driver considers unavailable or potentially problematic:
1.1. for a read, selects the servers the satisfy the active read preference;
1.2. for a write, selects writable servers.
```

Note the _"barring those that the driver considers unavailable or potentially problematic"_ piece of the algorithm, which is currently absent in the proposed documentation.

> #. If at least one readable server exists, the driver calls the user-defined

Reviewer: [Style guide](https://www.mongodb.com/docs/meta/style-guide/style/lists/#list-items): Make all list items parallel. For example, all items start with fragments, or all items use sentences. A list can have a mix of fragments and sentences as long as all of the items start with a fragment.

S: Edit step 2 to be a fragment, or edit all fragments to be full sentences

>    server-selector function and passes in the list from the previous step

Reviewer 2: A custom server selector is used if present regardless of the previous step producing any servers or not. We don't have to explicitly say this, it is even preferrable not to say if there is a way to phrase it like that, but explicitly saying the opposite (that the custom selector is not used when the previous step produced no servers) is incorrect.

>    server-selector function and passes in the list from the previous step

Reviewer 2: We must not say "readable" here, because this step must be the same for reads and writes, as the text currently says below: _"The remaining steps are identical to the preceding list."_.

#. Applies the ``localThreshold`` connection setting to the list of
   servers returned from the function

#. Selects a server at random from the servers still on the list and

>    executes the operation against this server

Reviewer 2: That's not exactly the algorithm. The actual behavior is:

4. Selects at most two random servers from those still on the list.
5. Selects the server with fewer outstanding concurrent operations.

When the {+driver-short+} executes a write operation, it begins by selecting all writeable

> servers, not just those that match the active read preference. The remaining steps are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
servers from the list of known servers, not just those that match the active read preference. The remaining steps are
```

> identical.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
identical to the preceding list
```

To learn more about the default server selection algorithm, which the driver follows

> when you don't specify any custom server selection logic, see

Reviewer 2: The "Default Algorithm" section includes applying user-defined server selector in step 2, which makes this sentence confusing. There is no "default" algorithm and some other algorithms, there is only one algorithm, and it applies a custom server selector if one is specified.

:manual:`Server Selection Algorithm </core/read-preference-mechanics/>` in the
{+mdb-server+} manual.

> Implementing Custom Server Selection Logic

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Implement Custom Server Selection Logic
```

---------------------------------------

You can implement your own custom server selection logic by creating a class that

> implements the ``ServerSelector`` interface and overrides the ``select()`` method. The following

Reviewer 2: The 

> and overrides the ``select()`` method

part adds no useful information. Let's remove it.

example shows a simple custom server selection class that selects servers with a ``type``
value of ``ServerType.REPLICA_SET_SECONDARY``:

.. literalinclude:: /includes/connect/ServerSelection.kt
   :language: kotlin
   :copyable: true
   :start-after: // start-custom-selector
   :end-before: // end-custom-selector

> You can then pass an instance of this class to your ``MongoClientSettings`` object by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the ``applyToClustersSettings()`` method to pass an instance of this class to your ``MongoClientSettings`` object
```

using the ``applyToClusterSettings()`` method. The following example shows how to create

> a ``MongoClient`` with an instance of the custom server selector from the preceding example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a ``MongoClient`` with an instance of the custom server selector class from the preceding example:
```

.. literalinclude:: /includes/connect/ServerSelection.kt
   :language: kotlin
   :copyable: true
   :start-after: // start-selector
   :end-before: // end-selector

> Using Settings to Configure Server Selection

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use Settings to Configure Server Selection
```

------------------------------------------

You can specify the following server selection settings in your ``MongoClient`` object or

> in your connection URI:

Reviewer 2: Let's specify the API classes each listed setting may be configured via: `MongoClientSettings` for `readPreference`, `ClusterSettings` for `localThreshold`, `serverSelectionTimeout`.

Reviewer 2: Sorry, I did not imply the information is to be added right here. The best place for this information is in the table below, either in the "Description" column, or in a new column.

Reviewer 2: Note also that the information you added on what property can be specified via what class is not correct at the moment:

> ``MongoClientSettings`` object (for the ``localThreshold`` setting), or a ``ClusterSettings`` object
(for the ``readPreference`` and ``serverSelectionTimeout`` settings)

I specified the correct info in the first comment in this discussion.

Reviewer 2: @mcmorisi please take a look at my previous comment, as the information is still incorrect.

Author: Apologies for this – hopefully should be resolved in the latest commit.

Author: Also can leave comments unresolved going forward – on the docs team it's pretty commonplace for PR authors to resolve comments as a checklist of sorts as they go through copy feedback. Will make a note to do this differently with tech reviews.

Reviewer 2: The issue with the approach you describe, is that the reviewer does not have a way to track which of the proposals/concerns he brought up he deems having been addressed. The PR author can track discussions he addressed with reactions, like ✅, while the reviewer tracks by resolving the discussions. If the PR author resolves a discussion, it is effectively lost for a reviewer.

.. list-table::
   :widths: 30 70
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Setting
     - Description

   * - ``localThreshold``
     - | The latency window for server eligibility. If a server's round trip takes longer
       | than the fastest server's round-trip time plus this value, the server isn't
       | eligible for selection.
       |
       | **Data Type**: ``Integer``
       | **Default**: 15 milliseconds
       | **Connection URI Example**: ``localThresholdMS=0``
       
   * - ``readPreference``
     - | The client's default read-preference settings. For more information on read preference
         options, see :manual:`Read Preference </core/read-preference/>` in the {+mdb-server+} manual. 
       |
       | **Data Type**: `ReadPreference <{+core-api+}/ReadPreference.html>`__
       | **Default**: ``ReadPreference.primary()``
       | **Connection URI Example**:

       .. code-block:: none
          :copyable: false

          readPreference=primaryPreferred
          &maxStalenessSeconds=90
          &readPreferenceTags=dc:ny,rack:1

   * - ``serverSelectionTimeout``
     - | The length of time the driver tries to select a server before timing out.
       |

>        | **Data Type**: ``long``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
       | **Data Type**: ``Long``
```
